Welcome back, we've spent quite
a bit of time talking about how our
analysis are meant to drive towards
some eventual action in the market.
But sometimes, our analysis actually
reveals that there are more questions we
need to answer before we can move forward.
In this short video, we're going to talk
about one way in which we launch a new
wave of analysis using experimentation.
Let's say that we're a wireless company
and we've done a predictive analysis to
understand who is most likely
to cancel their service.
Those of you who have taken earlier
courses should recognize this example.
We actually want to do something with that
analysis but we're not exactly sure what.
We have a lot of ideas about how we
might reach out to those customers and
get them to stick around, but
we don't know which ideas will work best.
We also know that if we get it wrong,
we can cause a lot of damage.
In this case, it makes sense to do some
sort of small scale test before we roll
out these ideas to our
larger customer base.
Now there's an awful lot of material
available on how to run and
measure controlled experiments and
on the statistics that underpin both the
design and execution of those experiments.
I fully encourage you to take
a full blown statistics and
experimental design course
at some point if you can.
But we won't get into those details here.
Rather, we're just going to focus on
a couple of general principles and
a few examples of how things
happen in the real world.
As you might imagine, some of
the things aren't necessarily ideal.
the basic idea behind
a controlled market experiment
is that they do something
to a set of customers.
We call this applying a treatment
to those customers, and
I compare what happens to those customers
with another set of similar customers that
didn't get the treatment,
we call this a control.
If I do this in the right way, I can
attribute differences in the behavior
between the treatment group and
the control group to the treatment itself.
In an ideal world with a stable
population and predictable behavior,
we can assemble a treatment group and a
control group by randomly selecting people
from the population and
randomly assigning them to each group.
If we do this correctly and our sample
are large enough then we can pretty easily
measure what happens after we apply
the treatment to the treatment group.
Here's an illustration of that scenario.
Let's say we were measuring some outcome
with the value shown on the y axis.
If our treatment and
control groups are truly random and
our treatment has an effect, we should see
identical behavior in the groups before
a treatment is applied and different
behavior after the treatment is applied.
This is what you see here.
It's almost always best that this kind of
controlled experiment can be achieved.
However in the real world, it's sometimes
the case we can't actually execute
experiments with such tightly
defined control groups.
For example, let's say that the test
required some sort of mass advertising or
promotion.
It would be difficult if not impossible to
ensure that only a randomly selected set
of people in a population saw a TV
commercial or heard a radio spot.
In this case,
the best that we can do is try to find
two different geographic markets
that are as similar as possible.
Apply the treatment to one and
compare it to the other.
Here's an illustration of
what this might look like.
In this case, the groups are not quite
the same prior to the treatment, but
they appear to be similar in performance.
We can look at the relative differences
between the groups before and
after the treatment,
to measure the effects of the treatment.
This approach can work,
but it presents some risk.
It's entirely possible that something else
may have happened during the experiment
that impacted the two markets differently.
Say for example, there was some
severe weather in one market, and
fair weather in the other.
In this case, our measurement might have
some unknown error which skews the result.
Nonetheless, it's quite common to see this
approach applied in business experiments.
In the worst case scenario there's no way
to establish a separate control group to
compare against our treatment group.
And the only option we have is to try and
compare the treatment group against itself
before and
after the treatment was applied.
This obviously requires us to make some
assumptions about what that single group
would have done had
the treatment not been applied.
Unlike the ideal in
market to market cases,
we don't have a proxy
that helps us account for
what else might have been going on in
the market as a whole at that time.
It goes without saying that this
approach is the riskiest of the three.
If anything other than the treatment
impacted the group during the experiment,
we'd have no way of accounting for
it explicitly.
Now the way we've introduced
experimentation here implies a purposeful
planning and execution process for
the experiment itself.
It turns out that's not the only kind of
experiment we might try to analyze as our
role of data analysts.
It can also be the case that we're trying
to gain some insights, by looking at
things that have naturally occurred in
the past that have some aspect of a test.
We call these natural experiments.
One example might be looking at how
a specific store was impacted when
a competitor opened up across the street.
Another might be assessing whether a local
customer care activity was influenced by
a severe weather event in one market.
Natural experiments almost never
have well defined control groups.
After all, we're looking at things that
just sort of happened versus those
that were planned.
As a consequence, we're usually forced
to use the less ideal group to group, or
self comparison methods
we outlined earlier.
Whether we're looking at planned or
natural experiments, as data analysts,
the task of measurement
usually falls to us.
Generally we're looking for differences
and we apply classical statistical methods
to characterize whether those
differences are significant or not,
based on the magnitude of the difference,
the variance in the measures, and
the number of data points
we have in the experiment.
Much of analysis is
pretty straight forward.
However there are some common traps we
can fall into if we're not careful.
Let's take just a minute and
talk about a couple of them.
Usually our experiment involves
trying to get people to do something.
For example,
we may make an offer to a customer with
the hopes that they will take that offer.
It's tempting to want to look at
only the results of the people who
actually took the offer,
a common mistake is to assess results by
comparing the takers to the control group.
This is a big mistake.
What about the people who
didn't take the offer?
How do we know we didn't have an impact,
especially an adverse impact,
on those customers?
The rule here is to always compare
the whole treatment group to
the control group.
It's okay to break
the measures into those for
takers and non-takers, but
the non-takers always need to be included.
The other mistake we tend to make is
looking too narrowly at the impacts of
the experiment.
Let's circle back to our
customer cancellation example.
Suppose wanted to keep customers
from canceling their service.
It would seem to make sense to simply look
at the difference in cancellation rates
between our treatment and
control groups in assessing
the financial impact of the effort.
However, there are a lot of
other things the customer might
do in response to our communication.
Did they change their calling plans
perhaps changing monthly revenue?
Do we stimulate usage or
additional calls to customer care,
perhaps changing the cost to serve.
These other impacts can have
a dramatic impact on the overall
success of the campaign and
should be included.
The way to avoid this problem is to really
think about all the things that a customer
might do in response to an experiment, and
plan in advance to measure
them as part of the analysis.
So that's a quick spin through
the high points of experimentation.
Again this isn't meant to be a complete
course on the topic, but in line with our
theme of real world analytics, we thought
it would be valuable to point out
a few ways in which compromises to
theory emerge in the work that we do and
to highlight a couple of common
pitfalls that we seek to avoid.
Keep this in mind is you consider
how you can use experiments as
actions in your analytic process.
See you next time.